Thank you, thank you friends, very much. It's always a celebration to come together, to reflect
on the Dharma, to practice the Dharma together. And so when we really connect to the lineage,
and we ask the turning of the wheel of Dharma, we're actually asking ourselves to show up,
like may my mind and my heart be available to connect to the Dharma right now. So that's
really kind of what we're asking. May I become receptive to be influenced by the truth of
goodness, the truth of the nature, the truth of love and compassion and wisdom. So we're
really trying to become very vulnerable, very flexibly receptive to the truth of interdependence
of the Dharma. And so in this way, Venerable Kamparumache always teaches time and again
at the beginning of every teaching, at the beginning of all their books, these three
things we need to do to like open our hearts and our minds to become receptive to the Dharma,
to become a suitable vessel, to become able to have a single line of Dharma totally change
our lives. There's always these three things. And with these three things, then everything
we experience will be like that. It will constantly, will be constantly reinvigorated by the truth
of the nature of the Dharma. These three things are renunciation, which is joy and appreciation.
The second is bodhicitta, genuine, heartfelt, courageous, love and compassion for all beings.
May every single being be free of suffering and the causes of suffering. May everyone
realize their innate goodness, the innate goodness of everything beyond all conceptual
designation and see this all the time, no matter what happens. And may I achieve enlightenment
personally in order to help make this happen. This is bodhicitta, courageous, the ones courageous
for enlightenment, the bodhisattvas. This is the heart of all things Mahayana, Sutra
Mahayana and Tantra Mahayana. And then thirdly, more specific to Tantra Mahayana, when our
mind actually rests in that awareness, this goodness of oneself, goodness of other, goodness
of all situations and circumstances, when we really bravely allow ourselves to relax
into that, then we have this, all of a sudden our sense doors relax and they get vividly
functional. All of a sudden we get a lot, we get enhanced. So what's that like experientially?
The Buddha gave millions of Tantras on this. What's the enhancement when we really recognize
and like let ourselves believe in our own Buddha nature, in the Buddha nature of all
beings, pure body, pure speech, pure mind. They're called pure perception. Our sense
doors soften, sharpen, open, extend, relax, get invigorated. We see pure form, pure sound,
pure speech, deity, mantra, Dharmakaya. This is pure perception. This is like foundational
for every single Vajrayana, everything, all three of these. So at the beginning of any
session when we study, contemplate, meditate, we really try to vividly make this a living
reality, not just a belief that we like have that idea, I'm a good Buddhist so I'll believe
these things. Instead we actually try to be a Buddha now, like actually connect to our
Buddha nature now. And how do we do that? These three ways. Bring up surging wave of
gratitude. How many things we have that are totally in our favor right now. And a surging
wave of gratitude, a genuine heartfelt kindness and just bravery. No matter what happens,
no matter what it takes, I will stay to help every single being become free of suffering.
And then thirdly, there's not really some big fire to put out. That's actually not
true. Things are inherently good. So that's a very brave view. It's pure perception. All
the nightmares, they're all dreams, they're like dreams. So we try to courageously allow
ourselves to wake up, be in a non-dreaming mode, in a fully wakeful way, to be awakened
right now. In this moment, then with these three things, try to turn on, activate, make
a living. Thank you. So if we do these three things, then everything becomes a dharma. And
all the 84,000 teachings of the Buddha, they're all just oriented towards helping us make
these three things be a living experience. Joy and appreciation, bodhicitta, and pure
perception. These are three essential aspects of what it means to be enlightened, to be awakened.
That's what the Buddha said. That's what Guru Rinpoche taught. All these masters,
all the way to our very own teachers, Venerable Kenshin Pauldron Chair Rinpoche,
Venerable Kemba Sanandanya Rinpoche. So whatever it takes, whatever is a skillful way for us to
just remember and actually let the fullness of each of these points kind of resonate and transform
ourselves, then that means we're actually living dharma. And not just kind of, you know, acting
dharma, or pretending dharma, or kind of feel like if I'm, you know, all the ways that we cannot
really let it sink in. But when we really let it touch us, the dharma is a living experience,
these three points as everything we need. And so then there's really countless ways to reactivate
this, because then nature is a field of infinite interdependence. So all these things are just
helping us remember, hey, you're interdependent. Hey, you're a part of this too. There's no fixed
stuck part. Everything's going to be something actually designed to wake us up. And then it's
a really a question of how receptive am I to receiving that wave as a reminder of dharma. So
there's a million ways we can unpack this. And today, the topic that I thought of the other day,
just as a personal exploration, and then I just kind of share vocally, as a nobody, speaking to
a camera with a room of lovely beings, but into the internet land that goes into who knows where,
for how long. So the topic for today, to echo out forever into infinity in digital world space,
is transcendental wisdom rainbow body. How to be uncompromising and flexible at the same time.
Transcendental wisdom rainbow body, how to be uncompromising and flexible at the same time.
So I've set the bar really high and said, let's see if I can jump off into that. And more it's
like a giant cliff. And I get to jump off of it. You get to all watch me fall and splat. So maybe
we'll fly for a minute and during the fall. Hopefully the wind will boost us a little bit.
There's so many ways to talk about this topic. And it's a very, I find it to be a very special
topic.
Because in Buddhism, all these teachings in Sutra and Tantra, they all point we have to come to
certainty wisdom about the truth of the Dharma. It's called in this clear mirror. I just was a
friend of mine here, a song a member here. This is my big stack of Dharma treasures for today.
Just mentioned something we pulled a bibliomancy quote, randomly pull a Dharma book,
clear mirror, due to his secret biography. And it says this, once you apprehend the incisive
certainty from deep within, that all phenomena of cyclic existence and enlightenment never
transcend the nature of space. That is called pure space. So this is a random book page poll
for today. Incisive certainty, certainty wisdom, no she or this certainty unwavering conviction
in the truth. Okay, uncompromising. All these teachings are trying no matter what happens to
us in any situation, even the most challenging difficult situations. We have an uncertainty,
or sorry, a an unwavering certainty and an incisive certainty or conviction. This is true.
That's where we're aiming with the Dharma to have unwavering certainty. That's really clear in the
teachings. Then the question is, what does that mean? Uncertainty, or sorry, certainty, or certain
conviction, an unwavering conviction. When, in what? And then we get the classic Buddhist answer,
it depends. Centered dependent. And so this is how I thought to explore this topic. Where we're
trying to get to is transcendental wisdom rainbow body. All the highest teachings, they say that's
the peak, that's the peak sign that we have attained full enlightenment. Not small enlightenment,
medium enlightenment, big enlightenment. Not our hot hood, Bodhisattva Bhumi hood, full unsurpassed
enlightenment. Two omnisciences, you know, every single relative position of phenomena happening
simultaneously without omission throughout the three times in the ten directions. That's relative
omniscience and absolute omniscience. You see that the nature of every single part in that entire
infinite inexhaustible web of interdependence cause, condition, and effect. You see the nature is
the
same all the time without omission or distortion. That's absolute omniscience. An indication that
this is achieved is transcendental wisdom rainbow body, like Guru Rinpoche, the great master of
Himalamitra. So this is quite a big topic. So as we ascend to that unsurpassed enlightenment,
that's what we're aiming to do. Boruchitta, may I achieve unsurpassed enlightenment in order to
serve all beings the exactly perfect way so I can help them achieve unsurpassed enlightenment. And
then we can just keep helping each other until every single being is free of suffering and the
cause of suffering. So along that path, if we see it as a path, if I'm in the mind state that sees
myself not there, and then the transcendental wisdom rainbow bodies where I have to get to,
then in between is a path. And if I'm in the mind state that things like that, then there's steps
on
this path is a sequence, right? This is a gradual approach to Buddhism. And that is always talked
about in nimma school as the nine yanas, the nine vehicles, the nine levels or stages of study and
practice. And here's where we can get a lot of refined detail about what are we having certainty
conviction in? Because every single one of those yanas or vehicles has a definitive view,
meditation,
conduct and fruition. This has just been repeated so many times by the Buddha, Guru Rinpoche, Long
Champa, all these great masters, His Holiness Dalai Lama says, Mipham Rinpoche, His Holiness
Dudra Rinpoche, Venerable Kemple Rinpoche, all these masters, they say these same things, these
nine
yanas have, they have a definitive view, meditation, conduct, and fruition, according to each level
. So
you asked a different level, what's the certainty wisdom? They'll say, this is the absolute
certainty
wisdom of our view. And everything else is the relative skillful means to help establish that
conviction. That's true for Yana one, Trivaka Yana, they have a definitive certainty conviction
they're trying to achieve uncompromising, no matter what happens, this is the absolute truth. It's
called definitive, definitive teaching of the Buddha, compared with the provisional or interpret
able
teaching of the Buddha. So one is the act the final teaching, undistorted final teaching. And the
other is all the skillful means, the supportive networks of circumstances that help us boost to
see that for ourselves as a visceral, complete embodied full experience of the truth of that.
It's called provisional. So this is centuries of debate on what is provisional? What's definitive?
What is what should I do really be uncompromising about? And what should I be flexible about? What
's
the skillful means? What's a wisdom? What's relative? What's absolute? This is a very big
topic in Buddhism, between Buddhists, between lineages between schools within schools, a debate,
which means that an active inquiry doesn't mean a fight or a war. It means an exploration. Buddhism
is a path of internal self revelation. We're disclosing more truth to ourselves with every
step with every moment. That's what bodhicitta does. We reveal more of our Buddha nature, more
of our self cognizant pristine awareness. Wisdom turns on, shines, it's not blocked. More truth
becomes apparent to myself, to my mind, my own mind. I become more certain. And what is that?
My view includes more. And what does that like in terms of a scholar kind of way? All of a sudden,
I go to another yana, another vehicle. Now I'm in a new view, meditation, conduct,
fruition. And it has a new definition of what's definitive, and a new definition of what's
provisional. And that goes all the way up until transcendental wisdom rainbow body, or the level
of zogchen, up to yoga, the ninth yana, where they said there's no further to go. At that point,
we're not talking about a path anymore, stages and steps and concepts and ways of refining
definitions, things to remove or add. It's not talking in that way anymore. It's a completely
different mode. We're not talking about conditioned to mind, duality mind, trying to refine
concepts
anymore. It's talking just about wisdom awareness seen clearly with two omnisciences. Stably,
uninterruptedly, all the time, every single moment. That just means bodhicitta is on all the time,
in a Sutra Mahayana perspective. So there's so many ways to approach these. And so that's kind of
the
general container of holding that I'm holding this what's uncompromising and what's flexible.
What's a certainty wisdom, and what's a skillful means that supports us, my own mind, my own heart,
to self recognize that that that wisdom with certainty. And so there's layers or levels or
openings, and foldings for the disclosement, more expansive revelation, a bigger aperture of more
cause, condition, and effect that I'm including. There's a lot of different ways to talk about
this. But that's kind of what we're talking about. And so one more is like a shout out. This is a
new
book my wife Amanda gave me recently. And I'm like, deliciously enjoying it. Notebooks of a
wondering monk. It's like notebooks of Venerable and Mathieu Ricard. I was like, I just more or
less
wanted to mention this because it's a new book. And it's really like, oh, juicy stories of his
life with all these great masters. But then I had to make it relevant to talking today. So page 241
,
he says, as our dear departed friend, the neuroscientist Francisco Varela once told me,
the best attitude is to leave the door open to new answers on the question of the nature of mind.
The best attitude is to leave the door open to new answers on the question of the nature of mind.
So this is an open door inquiry. This is a personal exploration. That's why in Buddhism, debate,
study,
and contemplation, they're all analysis and analytic method. Analysis means to loosen or set
free. This is again and again repeated by the great Buddhist teacher, Elizabeth Matisse Namgyal,
to loosen or set free. That's the function of analysis, to open the aperture, to open the door
of my awareness, my heart. So I feel more, I see more, I include more, I see things more clearly.
So
it's not actually just a question of quantity more, but it's actually quality to more clearly. So
both more and clearly. So without that, then the Dharma just becomes fundamentalism. It's not
analysis, it's just belief. Just another blind belief. It's not liberative in that case, it may
be really wholesome and healthy and oriented in the right direction. But it won't be liberative,
because in the end, beliefs aren't liberative. Just holding on to an idea is not liberative.
That's just having a concept. Study is really important. Having good concepts or finding
concepts is crucially important. But the main point is to go beyond the limits of conceptual
frameworks. That's called wisdom or jhana, or prajna, it depends. But to have wisdom is a lived
experience, the definitive experience of wisdom. That's where we're kind of aiming towards. So
analysis. What's definitive, what's provisional, what is flexible, and what is uncompromising.
In Rinpoche's book, Uprooting Clinging, commentary on mid-power Rinpoche's wheel of analytic
meditation,
it's 58. I think I've read this before, but it's really, I think, very helpful for me.
Each aggregate form, feeling, perception, mental formation, consciousness, each aggregate, this is
like core Buddhist teaching. Each aggregate appears like the reflection of the moon and water,
a mirage, or a banana tree. In each case, there's no essence, no solid existence. They're all based
on impermanence. They exist in a momentary and changeable state. This investigation leads us to
the conclusion the world of experience is an illusion. And since this world is an illusion,
there's no need to be attached. Attachment and clinging are foolish, unnecessary, and unwise.
If the world consists of nothing but the five aggregates, and they have no more reality than
a reflection of the moon and water or a mirage, then all attachment must also be based on illusion.
Maintaining awareness of this nature is the practice of meditation. The result of a thorough
and focused investigation is the development of definitive understanding. The perfect understanding
we gain through the use of this mental analysis isn't something we need to believe in. This
awareness is certainty wisdom. When we meditate in this way, using this analytic meditation,
old habitual patterns will continually activate clinging and attachment. But if we maintain the
meditation, we'll clearly see that even birth and death are illusions. Birth and death are just
habitual patterns. The continued application of this analytic meditation will eventually lead
us to discover the transcendental wisdom rainbow body, or jalu, that is beyond habitual patterns.
In the Dzogchen teachings, there are many stories of how great masters developed such an elevated
realization of the transparency of reality, based on their realization of the empty,
illusory nature of everything, that they can move through material objects. They could do this
because they had actualized the true nature and thoroughly realized how apparent reality is
constructed. The Tibetan phrase for the relative truth of how things appear is kunzob dempa,
or samvrta satcha in Sanskrit. The literal translation of this is the truth that is
completely superficial, artificial, or unreal. Relative truth.
The process of investigating using this technique of analytic meditation is so important,
because it establishes a foundation upon which there can be proper development.
Without it, even if it appears that we're progressing, there will be difficulty later.
Any progress made without this foundation will eventually collapse.
The definitive understanding, or the view established by analytic meditation,
is to not be attached to any aspect of reality. Arriving at this state of awareness that is
beyond attachment causes us to perceive everything as being in transit, moving, changing, and only
manifesting on a temporary basis. From this point of view, it becomes also clear that when we no
longer have attachment, anger will not develop in us. This is one of the principal understandings
of
Mahayana Buddhism. Renunciation doesn't mean being completely removed from the world. It simply
means
being detached. The Buddha left his royal palace to go into the jungle and meditate. That is one
form of renunciation. But the more profound meaning of renunciation is having non-attachment
that avoids clinging to worldly activities. Having no attachments is a much deeper form of ren
unciation
than simply separating ourselves from objects of attachment. The whole idea or focus of ren
is to attain a clear understanding of the state of non-attachment. When we have no attachment to
worldly activities, the ideal of renunciation is realized. Then we can find enjoyment in every
experience. So if we actually stabilize non-attachment, the result is we can enjoy everything.
Not that we enjoy nothing, which is quite a big difference.
This is so deep.
Okay, great. So we're doing this big, quick, fast sweep of Nanyanas.
So I'm going to sweep fast. But it's good. It's good to do. What I found is that if we don't have
some basic fundamental frameworks, then it's so easy to get lost in the maze of Tibetan Buddhism.
We've so kindly received these from great masters like Mipham Rinpoche.
And Venerable Kenshin Paul and Cher Rinpoche, Venerable Kenpo San Doenry Rinpoche, this is one
of the main lineages they hold, the scriptural lineage of Mipham Rinpoche. Ken Rinpoche said this
very clearly. So Mipham Rinpoche taught these essential frameworks very clearly. These Nanyana
frameworks and the four philosophical schools, we need to have some of these basic bedrock
teachings
so that that's as a firm foundation for our analytic meditation. So then when all these old
or hidden subtle habitual patterns come up, then we don't break or we don't also tighten and shrink
.
Then we can have a basic way of framing and holding so we have enough space in the room.
So the object of attention, this big arising, distracting, old habitual pattern comes up,
and that object doesn't fill up the whole room because we have more space than that because
it's being held in a much bigger frame. So these are big frame discussions. So the Nanyanas,
there's always a relative and absolute truth. This is according to Mipham Rinpoche.
On relative truth, it's always subdivided into pure relative truth and impure relative truth.
Pure relative truth is where tantras begin. Impure relative truth is sutras.
So if we look at impure relative truth, impure relative truth is then subdivided into two.
Valid impure relative truth and invalid impure relative truth.
Valid relative truth, impure relative truth is how sentient beings see something in a way
that helps them get to pure relative truth and absolute truth.
Invalid impure relative truth is a sentient being using a belief that just helps them stay more in
some sorrow. Just to believe it's just not helpful, it's just another layer of karmic habitual
obscuration that makes us more closed off to being receptive to being changed to influence by
the dharma. So then we're talking specifically, there's these two types. There's sentient mind
that has beliefs and concepts that help it wake up and be free and that don't help it wake up and
be
free. So in the category of the invalid impure relative truth, sentient stuff that just doesn't
help, there's four types. This is in Gurumache's Garland of Views. Four general categories of what
seems definitive to each of these views. See if you can relate to it. I definitely can relate to
all four. One, materialism. What's materialism basically? Technically, according to Gurumache.
Why is the sky blue? You plant the seed, it grows into a thing. So when I ask you those questions,
the materialist is like, "Eh, this is boring. I'm gonna go watch TV." Those questions just
aren't interesting. It's just what's right, what's happening right around me. This is called
materialist. Cause, condition, and effect, it's just not very interesting. Materialist, hedonist.
Second, why is the sky blue? Why is good things having a bad people, bad things having a good
people? It's kind of interesting, but I'm really probably trying to do what feels good to me right
now. So hedonist is mainly trying to make this life pretty much just nice, comfortable according
to what they want. And those deeper questions about cause, condition, and effect, maybe it
sparks a little something, but not much. They're more interested in just having a good time.
I can totally relate to that too. Again, what's on TV? Not even say TV now, Netflix. They wanted
me to say Netflix, not only to say Metaverse. And they wanted me to say, "I'm watching it." They'll
be like, "Which world system are you in the Metaverse?" But anyway, it's about to get really weird.
Third, nihilists. Nihilists, they believe in cause and condition and effect only as far as they can
see, hear, touch, taste, and think. So they'll believe in cause, condition, and effect, but only
so far is a gross, apparent reality. The more subtle levels of causation that might be there,
they don't believe it. Gotta see it to believe it, right? They're seeing is a very specific range
of
things. There's all kinds of things. The great Master's Oxford, Ken Sirimiche often talks about
this as rationalism, empiricism. We talk about this as modernism, the European age of enlightenment
.
There's all kinds of different ways. Some people just call it science, as if that's not talking
about it as a religion, because which science? There's a lot of sciences and they've changed
almost every science before this century has been wrong. And it's going to be the same with this
science right now. So yeah, empiricism, rationalism, what my cognitive sense doors,
how far they go, beyond that, not interested. Or I have certainty, conviction that it's not true,
it's wrong, it doesn't exist, it's a baby belief, it's superstition, whatever, you insert your
rationalization. So that's called nihilist. Tinley Norburn, but she talks about this a lot in white
sale. The fourth one is eternalist. So you have a subtler apprehension or kind of appreciation
for cause, condition, and effect. But when the deeper questions come, like where did this all
come from? What is the meaning of life? What happens after we die? These are subtle things
you can't just see in a telescope. Even with logic, there's different logic systems and
they'll have different ways of engaging that inquiry and they'll come to different conclusions.
So the eternalist, they always answer those deeper, subtle, quiet,
really less apparent questions. They answer it according to their belief system.
Where did this come from? Insert your belief system answer. Where do we go after we die?
Insert belief system answer. So they believe in cause, condition, and effect up to a point,
but when you really get down to subtle cause, they insert a belief. When you get into subtle
cause, they insert an effect. At the end, they say you just have to have faith.
Right? And so what's the difference between that faith and certainty wisdom? That's where as a
Buddhist, we need to be really careful that I'm not being a fundamentalist Buddhist. I'm actually
being an active living, living Dharma Buddhist practitioner. Really trying to see for myself,
learn the teachings, and see the chain of cause, condition, and effect. Because that's what defines
Buddhism. A full range exploration of cause, condition, and effect. All the way back, beginning,
beginning, beginning, beginning, and, and, and, and, and wide, small, micro, meso, macro, like the
whole
range of interdependence. That's the field of play of Buddhism. And so here we get into valid
impure relative truth. And what constitutes valid impure relative truth? In Buddhist terms,
it's a path of liberation. A view is considered valid if it leads you towards liberation,
freedom from suffering and the causes of suffering. That's what considered valid.
So it's leading me towards absolute truth. You could talk about it like that. And all the different
yanas, they would talk about it like that. It's leading to absolute truth or ultimate realization,
how things are, not just how they appear. Not just relatively how they appear. Ultimately,
how are they definitively when seen in an unmistaken way? So this is valid impure relative
truth. How sentient beings see things when they're on a path, using frameworks, concepts, study,
contemplation to directly experience and fully integrate wisdom, which is liberative.
So then the wisdom in that context is what is definitive or what we can't compromise.
But as I said before, each yana, our vehicle has a different answer to what is the definitive
wisdom. And so here, now we're in this, now we're in Buddhism. Then there's nine of these.
Nine answers of what is provisional, what's definitive? What do we not compromise?
What do we be flexible on? So this is how Buddhism is very non-dogmatic. Buddhism is
self-composting. In the end, the system dismantles itself. But we shouldn't dismantle the system
too early. Because if we're still on the path, and we need more steps, and we think we're at the
goal,
but we're actually on the path, then all of a sudden we can get in a position where we have no
more steps, but we're not at the goal. And that's really a hard place to get out of, because we
think we're there and enlightened maybe, but we're not really there. So Maitreya said, "Of all the
desires we give up, of all the concepts we give up, the goal and desire for enlightenment is the
final one we stop believing in." It's the last one, not the first. If we give up enlightenment
as a goal early, and we're not enlightened, then we kind of, our path gets really wonky hard.
It's basically a pathless path that we can't change anything about ourselves,
but we're still really deluded. So then that's really hard to undo that.
Great. So here's another new book, Mipham Rinpoche, "Gesar" book.
And this is a forward by Zogg-Sarkhan Siddhartha Rinpoche.
And it's a forward, so it doesn't require transmission.
Great. By Zogg-Sarkhan Siddhartha Rinpoche.
Human beings with all of their confusions, delusions, and self-righteous moralizing
have relied to some extent on empirical research from time immemorial. Today, empiricism is the
norm. If a phenomena cannot be validated or legitimized by reputable academics, perhaps at
Oxford, or sorry, at Oxbridge or Ivy League University, it is labeled with a carefully
crafted literary term like magical realism or legend and relegated to a pile of quaint,
old-fashioned archaic beliefs. If it is validated, if a famous academic or scientific institution
gives it their seal of approval, everyone else feels safer about using it and won't feel
embarrassed about sharing it with others. But no matter what tools are applied during the process
of legitimization, an experiencer, enjoyer, decider is a must. And the rather vague term we use to
describe that experiencer is mind. Curiously, empiricists don't appear to have noticed that
no matter where mind is, with a shaman in a remote jungle in Peru or a nerdy scientist in a
Cambridge
lab, mind is necessarily an unstable conditioned phenomena that falls victim to causes and
conditions at the drop of a hat. All it takes is an impatient word from a disgruntled spouse over
breakfast, or the wrong choice of salad dressing at lunch, and mind flip-flops from happy to sad,
kind to cruel, easygoing to outraged. Yesterday, I was on the phone, and I didn't have like a
headset phone. I had a phone, and I like put the phone, and I was like this with the phone,
talking on the phone for way too long because I had to write. And I went to stand up after that,
and I almost fell over. And for the whole rest of the night, I had vertigo. And I just had to go to
sleep. Like it was like couldn't stand upright. Literally just my head was like that for too long,
and all of a sudden I can't even stand. Such an influenceable condition, the puny little,
so fragile being. So fragile. It's just like moving the body in a position for like a little
bit, and then I can't even walk. We're so influenceable. Oh, I can't have my coffee in
the morning. Oh, I can't. I have my day. You know, like I can't, you know, I eat too much. Oh,
it's like so I'm okay. So that just means such a victim. It's so easy to be a victim. Anyway,
so that just means my sense of definitive, what is true, what's uncompromising is really weak.
Because if all of a sudden it's all falling apart, and I freak out, then I don't have any
definitive or uncompromising. There's no ground I can rely on. I'm just reacting.
And so Buddhism is designed to not just be in a reactive mode all the time.
Because then we're just like any thing that comes in front of us, we are, oh, yeah, it's just like
a
kid, like a little kid. We have no self agency, no autonomy, then how are we going to be courageous
to help all beings be free of suffering? All the, we've seen a little glimpse of the horrors of
samsara right now. We're using all these really luxurious technologies in a warm room with
full bellies and all that we have no idea what the horrors of samsara are like. I don't all these
hell realms and things it's like, if we had a glimpse of them, we would just be shattered into
1000 pieces like put a chin Rizzi. But we don't, I get upset if my coffee is not hot enough.
Very weak, very weak mind. My mind's very weak.
So that's why the path is really important because liberation is just not talk.
Doesn't really do much to just have a patchy, they call it patchy,
patchy realization, sometimes a rainbow mouth.
Doesn't help to just patch on patch on idea of liberation on a belief system that's totally
corrupt. It's just window dressing. It doesn't really do anything when the times get tough.
It just falls off. That's why we need a certainty conviction when the times get tough. These times
are getting tough. They're getting tougher. They're going to get a lot tougher. There's a
kind of very visceral experience. I think more people are having that the opportunity to prepare
for emergency is shrinking. Now it's getting to be emergency. And in a lot of places in the world,
they're in that emergency already. They're prep times over in so-called first world industrialized
places. We're just scared that that'll happen to us. A lot of these countries, it's always been
like
that. They're already post-apocalyptic. All these indigenous, look at the Tibetans, they're already
in post-apocalyptic times. They're not waiting for the world to end. Their world ended. It was
crushed.
But look at them, how courageous they are, how forgiving. They're still bodhicitta. They still
care. They're still so curious, so kind. Look at what that system of liberation is doing for them
as a people. As millions of people, different people, totally different people. It's not just
homogenous group, same person. It's so varied people. How resolutely confident and courageous
this path of awakening is for them as a general culture. It's really just astounding that such a
culture in the millions exists when we're trying to think about, oh, how can we deal with these
big meta-crisis and all these large-scale problems and all that. There's already been cultures for
centuries where you have millions of people intentionally go out of their way to not kill
bugs. This has been figured out. We've done, look at the Jains. This is not some, just because
like a lot of tech bro, white investor guys haven't recognized or heard about bodhicitta,
it doesn't mean it hasn't done here. There's cultures that are grounded and based in bodhicitta
for centuries now. There's all these books, millions of tantras on bodhicitta. How do you
design a culture of enlightenment culture? They've been doing this for centuries.
And now we're going to rely on Mark Zuckerberg to figure it out for us.
Good luck with that. Good luck. He's not going to figure it out. Bodhicitta is the answer.
With all these things we experience, bodhicitta is the answer. You have electricity, bodhicitta.
You don't have electricity, bodhicitta. It's the answer. This is the one universal answer. This is
the definitive truth. This is the uncompromising, unwavering thing. And so all the nine yanas are
just teaching on bodhicitta. Relative bodhicitta, absolute bodhicitta. Then the super whirlwind for
philosophical system, if we go from flexibility to uncompromising, relative to absolute, what do we
need to be skillful about? What do we need to be clear and unwavering about? One, first, the root
cause of all this troublesome sara is the sense of me. I'm the most important thing in the whole
world. I'm the same me today and I'm better than you. That's the root cause. First thing to do is
recognize the selflessness of that. It is an interdependent condition, dependently arisen,
mere appearance. It's just aggregates. These multiplicity of things coming together
and aggregating and we falsely think that that is a singular me. That false reification,
the false kind of like illusory, artificial glazing over of all the nuance into a sense of
me that's more important than everyone, that is the thing that has to be definitively recognized
in the shravakayana for the, what's it called? Vibhashika school, exposition school.
Relatively, everything's dependently arisen. Ultimately, I am selfless. There is no fixed me.
And what do they call that? They're irreducible dharmas.
Teeny, teeny, teeny, tiny, partless particles of mind, space, and time. That's their definitive
or ultimate uncompromising position. They believe in these partless particles. What current
modern science is looking for a theory of everything, an irreducible theory of everything.
So this is the Buddhist version of that in the Vibhashika school. There's micro, micro, teeny,
tiny, irreducible. You cannot break them further, unbreakable. Partless particles of time,
space, and mind. This is the ultimate uncompromising view in the shravakayana for, sorry,
the exposition school. So then, okay, I believe that. But say I don't believe that. Why? And
that's what I failed to say so far. And then I'm going to wrap this up and we'll go practice.
Why? Why would I look at that view further? Why wouldn't I just stop and be like, that is a
sophisticated view. If I got the Nobel prize for actually finding the theory of everything that
unites strong, weak nuclear force with gravity and electromagnetism, I feel like I would probably
just chill after that. I wouldn't look further. That's like what no one in that range of scientific
endeavor has ever come across. Like that would be a good life's work. But so why to go further?
More? Is there more definitive? And that's the drive of sukramahayana. What serves?
Does that help all beings be free of suffering? It might help some. It might help a lot,
but does it help all? And so I have to keep looking.
What serves better? What serves now? What is helpful now? That's the drive that leads in
uncompromising certainty to open, to see its contextualization. That it too is a conceptual
view that's held in place by beliefs. That's how a definitive understanding of one yana opens into
become a provisional, a provisional truth in the next yana. So okay, so why would I do that?
Irreducible particles of time, space, and mind. How would I do that? The next level of
philosophical
school says that sounds good, but how would I know it? Because they fundamentally posit mind and
body
material and non-material is two separate things. They're different in kind. So how could they ever
interact? So what you get in that view is there are these universal, there are these particular
things, these irreducible kind of partless particles of time, space, and mind. But all we
ever see of it is a mental, conceptual map that maps onto it. So all we ever have direct contact
with is our idea of what's actually ultimately true. We never have direct contact with what's
actually irreducibly true. So it's a representational theory of mind, correspondence theory of mind
.
All we ever engage with is our mapping of this irreducible ultimate reality that's
essentially not material. Sorry, it's material and there's not material. So not material
can interface with the not material. The material can interface with the not material. So there's
always like this kind of like corresponding thing where they can't exactly touch because they're
different in kind. That's the idea. So then mind only school, the next one comes and says,
but that's how do we know that's true? And what they say is it's not true. That's not definitive.
It's provisional. What's definitively true in mind only school chitamatra is it's only mind.
You have a mental idea of mental expression. It's just mental stuff. So they say there's three
kinds,
imaginary, dependent, arisen and true nature. These are all bedrock Buddhist frameworks that
Rinpoche's have taught so many times that all these masters teach, that all these shedras teach,
that even if we're not going to become a scholar, we should know this stuff basically.
Because this is like a synthesizing something in 20, it's like a 20 minute TED talk instead of
10 years of becoming a Kenpo or Kenmo. This is a really super condensed cartoon version.
So there's illusory or the imaginary, the Kuntag, Xianhuang, Londrup. Kuntag is imaginary.
Xianhuang is dependent origination, dependently arisen and Londrup or Yondrup is a true nature.
This is mind only school formatting. Imaginary is things like me. They say it's a complete fiction.
There is no referent in reality that corresponds to that. It's an utter fabrication.
They say it's like a horn of a rabbit. They also give examples like cable, house.
It's all imaginary. All this stuff we think is so we're so worried about.
It actually doesn't even point to anything that's there.
So Buddhism is deep. So then, okay, then what's next? Dependently origination.
They say that's actually what's there that's interacting in pattern sequences of cause,
condition and effect. Okay, so then there's impure relative truth, pure relative truth.
So that's something that can be either way and pause that. And then there's true nature.
True nature is how does the mind see dependent origination, the dependent part without mistake.
So they believe there is a non-dual mind that sees that clearly without mistake.
And so it's only mind experiencing itself. And some of what mine creates is utter fiction.
And some of what mine creates is actual patterns of interactivity. And the mind that sees the
patterns of interactivity without any error is called true nature or non-dual mind.
This is mind only school. Then, Midway Manyamaka, they say that's provisional.
That's just an idea. It's just a belief. It's just dogma. Show me true nature mind.
Show me. Where is it? Find it. Which part of the body? Which part of the mind? Where? What's its
shape, size, color? If it's a thing there, like to show me. I want proof. So Midway Manyamaka says
that the definitive understanding of Midway Manyamaka view is empty of inherent existence.
That's uncompromising view. Relatively, everything is dependently originating.
Everything. There's no ground. There's no birth, no death. That's why they say the
three liberations. Empty cause, empty result, empty no characteristics.
There's so many teachings on this. In general, it's called emptiness.
Lack of inherent existence. Then the other kind of way to talk about Midway Manyamaka school is
beyond conceptual designation. Not designated by anything, even to say it's empty.
We're not designating an it, a type of being, or a quality it has of being empty. We're not in a
mind that designates like that. They call it wisdom mind. They actually don't call it anything,
like Prasankaka Midyamaka. They just refute any kind of option you put on the table,
because they don't establish any position. Their definitive kind of view is no view,
because they show how every view includes a fundamental contradiction or absurdity.
They're all concepts or self-contradictory if you look closely enough. If you analyze and loosen
them, open them enough, they self-destruct. Concepts, they only go so far. So this becomes
the bedrock of Tantra. Emptiness. This is called second turning or wrong tongue. Empty of self,
empty of self-fixation or self-identity or conceptual designation. Empty of that. That's
called a thorough selflessness of self and other. So then this is the basis of Tantra.
So now we're in, now this is third Yana. So this is all that we've talked about.
The Vibhika school, Strntaka school, mind-only school, middle way,
middle way, Madhyamaka. That's the first three Yanas in Nyingma Buddhism. First three vehicles.
Yana four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. That's all Tantra. So that's what this Dujum Teresanandra
,
this is assuming this is, we know this stuff. Like when we do Dujum Teresanandra, like these are
bedrock things. It's assuming we like kind of should get some degree of usefulness. Why? Because
we're trying to get more and more kind of clear on what serves, serves to do what? Liberate self,
liberate other. Liberate myself from that false imaginary sense of a me being the most important
thing in the world and liberate other. Like what are the skillful means? It's support, like really
helps someone else kind of lift the burden of them having that mistaken view too. And the most
skillful, subtle, accurate, like really supportive uplifting ways possible. That's like actually
effective skillful means. But here I'll mention this one thing and then we'll go into the practice.
This book is amazing. Douglas Duckworth. Tibetan Buddhist philosophy of mind and nature. Douglas
Duckworth is brilliant. He's like Mipham Rinpoche scholar. It's crazy how smart he is in terms of
synthesizing all these things. So I'm really so impressed. He's just amazing. And he's really
overlooked because he's so quiet and humble. He's a student of Chikanyama Rinpoche and he's so
quiet. He's like a soft, quiet practitioner, which means he's like more reliable.
He doesn't have a, I don't think he has a webpage or anything.
Yeah, good. So here's one. In this book, 129, the central place of embodied personal knowledge here
as an active living truth contrasts sharply with the modern ideal of disinterested knowledge or
impersonal faceless facts. Indeed for Buddhists, transformative knowledge is the most important
kind of knowledge there is. The supposition that valueless, dead ideas, static truths
are the only real truths there are is what Donald Evans is referred to as the dogma of impersonal
ism.
He characterized impersonalism as the dogmatic rejection of any claim that requires personal
transformation to be adequately understood and appraised. Moreover, disinterested, impersonal
facts are arguably never completely separate from personal interests and values. An implication of
this is there can be no real distinction between facts and values, nor between domains of ontology
and ethics. And this is as true for the orientation of science as it is for Buddhism.
So the simple way to say this, and this is a big old philosophy book that's actually really
easy to read compared to most philosophy in my experience, is that everything, like anything of
what's of most value is wisdom, and wisdom to get there is you have to undergo a process of
transformation. And transformation means I totally have to put my own ideas and beliefs and values
on the line to be changed and interpreted and basically seen if they're true or not. And that
means I have to fully engage it as a subjective, intersubjective, objective, interobjective
experience. This is a full-on investigation, not just the empirical objective part of it,
but the full-on experience of a lived reality as a person in a world with moving stuff.
So it has to be transformative. And then here, because otherwise wisdom doesn't happen,
it's just belief. That's just study contemplation. Belief is just study and contemplation, not
liberative. Prajna, or wisdom, is actually transformative. And here, there's one other
thing again by Duckworth, and this is so awesome. This is where he gets to Tantra. And then we'll
go to practice Tantra. This is from his book. This is a book I just exited. So this is in
Douglas Duckworth, Jungang Mipham, His Life and Times. This book is so amazing. From 2011,
it's now getting old, too. It's really, really good. And I excerpted it here. He's talking about
what Tantra is. So here, we've gotten all the way to emptiness of self and others. Now we're saying
,
well, what's next? This is third turning, where we establish Buddha nature as the definitive,
uncompromising position. Everything else is a skillful, flexible means to get to that.
Level of position, that level of kind of nuance or flexibility. So here, he talks about this.
This is awesome. And then we'll go to practice.
Enigma, let me make sure this is the right one. Yeah. Okay. This is wild.
Enigma presentations of philosophical systems, which we did just a minute ago,
and it was really clunky and bad. Enigma presentations of philosophical systems,
the view does not culminate in the consequent school of the middle way, but ascends through
the Tantras. Another character of the Enigma tradition is to present internal distinctions
with the views of different Tantras. In the same way that a hierarchy of four philosophical
systems in Sutra, the great exposition school, Sutra school, mind only, and middle way,
in the same way that this hierarchy is represented as an ascending scale with each level transc
ending
the limitations of the previous one, the hierarchy of views extends through the Tantras. Thus,
Tantra is treated as the next paradigm that resolves the shortcomings of the preceding level,
which is the consequent school, while incorporating its insight. In this way, Tantra marks a
distinct
philosophical horizon for the Enigma tradition, and here's where it gets really good. In Mipham's
works, the hierarchy of views of the four philosophical systems appears to be based
on an internal principle of emptiness as ineffability. The higher the view, the more
increasingly ineffable reality is acknowledged to be. In this way, he presents the philosophical
systems of the causal vehicle of Sutra as a hierarchy based on the empty quality of reality.
The higher the view, the more comprehensive the representation of emptiness.
The four philosophical systems thus primarily reflect an analytic approach. The increasingly
eminent purity of reality, however, seems to be the internal logic guiding the hierarchy of views
within the resultant vehicle of Tantra. As such, Tantra's hierarchy is oriented more towards an
experiential dimension rather than an analytical one. In the context of the four or six classes of
Tantras, we can see how the hierarchy shifts from the principle of increasing transcendence,
emptiness, as it is in Sutra, to the principle of eminence. That is, the higher the view,
the more wisdom becomes an imminent reality. Mipham generally distinguishes the hierarchy
of all the Buddhist teachings in both the philosophical systems of Sutra in the causal
vehicle and the classes of Tantra in the resultant vehicle based on a hierarchy of gradual to
sudden.
That is, the higher the view, the more sudden the process of realization.
So this is cool. The Sutra view is an ascending hierarchy of seeing emptiness more fully.
The Tantra then takes that up as an ascending hierarchy of seeing the purity of relative
reality more fully. So instead of just saying it's empty of being fixated or stuck, then that gets
to
middle way school. And on top of that, in addition to that, what happens once we're not stuck in
fixation? The imminent purity of experience starts becoming self-evident to ourselves. And what's
that
called? Pure body, pure speech, pure mind. And so the ascending Bhumi paths, like when we get into
Tantra practice of Bhumis, all of a sudden it's talking about deity, mantra, and Dharmakaya.
Whereas in the Sutra, they're not talking about that. They're just more pointing towards
the empty quality of experience. The Tantras then, based on the empty quality of experience,
open the imminent realization of the purity of all phenomena. So that's why in Kriya Tantra,
you get a pure deity that you line up with through all these practices, and you get blessed,
and then you become pure. And then in Upa, you're seen more as like the deity is an equal to you,
but you have to still line up to the deity, which is pure. You line up and then you're pure too.
And then Kriya, Upa, Yoga, Yogayana, then it's doing a view where it's pure, more like friends.
Like you're not seeing as a hierarchy of like their pure and you're not. You're seeing it as
I'm pure, you're pure, but you still have to do these ascetic practices to establish that view.
Then you get to inner Tantras, Maha Yoga, Anu Yoga, Ata Yoga. Maha Yoga says it's all pure.
Form is pure, sound is pure, space is pure, and that's when they start talking about deity,
mantra, and dharmakaya. This is a creation stage, visualization practice. This is where it's
emphasizing a pure mandala. I'm a deity, everyone's a deity doing enlightened activities. Then Anu
Yoga deepens the purity. Not only is outside pure, my whole inner system is like nested matrices of
enlightened mandalas of deities doing deity activities. Then in addition to that, Dzogchen
says don't use any method to establish that view, because that's that Anu Yoga is completion stage
with characteristics, using supports like salong tumo, these certain things, using these very rapid
skillful means supports to activate the realization of outer purity and inner purity. So this is
the
eminent purity becoming more self-evident. Dzogchen says don't use those supports. It's an effort
less
path. You recognize non-conceptual wisdom awareness as the path. So this is the highest resultant
vehicle, and then you allow that recognition, the total sudden view that everything's already
accomplished to just naturally manifest itself. Let's call it the path of liberation, self-liber
ation.
It undoes itself. It kind of shows its own effulgence or whatever its nature by itself
without you having to do anything. So that's the definitive view in Dzogchen. And then as a final
note, that Dzogchen definitive view means it includes all the subviews. Why? Because what serves
best? It's not just self-liberation, it's other liberation. So Dzogchen includes all of the other
methods and view meditation, conduct, fruition. It includes all of them, and it always activates
its responsiveness based on what's helpful. What's helpful for me to wake up, what's helpful for
the
other to wake up, and it does that seamlessly, effortlessly. They call it spontaneously. And then
it activates that view, meditation, conduct, fruition, held within an effortless responsiveness.
So then you get a great completion, great perfection. So it's not effortless in all the
gradual stuff's bad. Effortless in all the gradual stuff is done effortlessly. So then it doesn't,
it becomes a fully inclusive view as a lived experience instead of a cognitive way to talk
yourself out of having to do any work on the path, which isn't a path. It's just called samsara.
And
then it's like the worst kind of possible position you can be in samsara. Because you, anyway, for
all the things I've said before about it. So that's the basic thing about how Buddhism isn't dog
matic
when it's done properly. Because it's a self-composting system. Like what is uncompromising? It
depends on what helps, what helps my mind wake up, what helps your mind wake up, what helps the
context be more flourishing and nutritious for beings to naturally wake up, for bodhicitta to
shine on. What helps do that? That's the definitive position in this context. And anything that
supports that I can be flexible with. Anything and everything. So that's where you get transcend
ental
wisdom rainbow body. Transcendental wisdom rainbow body is where there's no longer a sense of
fixation on of any position being held. All you are is a seamless responsive, like a seamless
responsitivity. Like all you do is seamlessly sync up with large webs of interactivity in whatever
way is helpful. As medicine, as a bridge, as a boat, as a mantra, as silence, as a nice memory,
as a breeze, as anything. And all the habitual patterns of mind, body, speech that we've
reified over countless time. That's all loosened with analysis and actual transformative practice.
So that it's dissolved into its pure natural energetic responsiveness as buddha nature. And
so all it does is like that's rainbow body, jalu. That's why gurimbatshe can appear in any form.
In any time. That's why when we recite the seven line prayer, they say that is gurimbatshe.
Or we visualize gurimbatshe. That is gurimbatshe. Or we look at our hand. That is gurimbatshe.
Or you listen to someone battle on and on again. That's gurimbatshe. It's all gurimbatshe. This is
the absolute definitive view from this highest yoga tantra from Zogchen. Everything is gurimbatshe.
Outside is gurimbatshe. Inside is gurimbatshe. Secret is gurimbatshe. Ultimate is gurimbatshe.
It's all gurimbatshe. And so then that you can say is it's all the guru. And so then that's why
we use one teacher as a guru to help us see that. It's easier using that with one person who's so
primed to be accomplished in study practice. So we use them because they really will help us see
that
in them. Then they'll help us see that in me. Then they'll help us see that in everything. And that
's
called zogchen. That this has all always been the guru. And then we spontaneously start just
oh we support beings to help them see this is the goodness is everywhere. This is pure relative
truth in union with great equality. So I hope that's helpful. I said a lot of things. Then we can
flash on. Just kind of any experience is kind of like any of that that's helpful. We'll flash
that on now and do our practice. We'll go right to the beginning of it. And we'll recite the
seven line prayer once. So I know I said a lot. So I thought I knew I was going to have to like
rip through a bunch of stuff. But I appreciate everyone's kind of patience. Hope it was helpful.
And may I synthesize this as a part of its Borich to endeavor for all beings to wake up
from suffering the cause of suffering please. Thank you all. Thank you. Thank you all.
Thank you. Quick final statement. If I could on this kind of relationship between what
is uncompromising what's definitive and then also what we have to be flexible about
what's relative what's skillful then definitely in terms of these highest teachings
Zogchen talking about transcendental wisdom rainbow body we have to come to the uncompromising
certainty wisdom of the true nature of our mind. We have to that is something we have to get
certain
about and anything that supports that is a path. And so we get personal instruction from a teacher
any on a support that works as a coherent ecology ecosystem you meditation conduct
fruition anything that boosts that realization is a supportive structure and we should be flexible
with what is skillful to help us do that why so we can be available to help other beings
skillfully flexibly with what actually helps not with what we want to help but what actually helps
what serves so it's really it definitely comes down to what we have to really have certainty about
is a true nature of mind regardless of what's happening to us that's something we have to get
definitive about and it's clear in all the Tantras guru yoga is the essential method
to bring about that realization swiftly that's a non-negotiable technique it's
all the Tantras say that all the Zogchen teachings say that connecting with the heart essence of
the
guru is the embodiment of all the buddhas of the three times that is the swift path
of Zogchen so that means we are seeing the guru as transcendental wisdom rainbow body
we're seeing the mandala that we're a part of as transcendental wisdom rainbow body
this guru yoga activates that view so we can really more quickly more thoroughly more
comprehensively integrate that view to all the aspects of our being so that's kind of where the
pinnacle that all these kind of views of kind of provisional and definitive they all get to that
of the various different eight practice lineages they all come to that point they agree on that
and then as a secondary comment in terms of wisdom rainbow body this more i just thought
i should throw it in because the topic's so big and i don't know when i'd come back to it
there's oftentimes a lot of kind of philosophical nitpicking over well just exactly is you know
which what's the subtlest level level fabric layer of reality in the bardo when it's not
conditioned
and how does the true nature express itself and is it red or blue you know is it two arms or four
is it man or is it woman is it multiple or is it singular is it all that stuff there's so many
discussions on that and there's a lot of tantras that make a lot of statements about that but i've
been in the room when people have asked that kind of question in the bardo after we die and duality
mind hasn't turned on yet and all these appearances start coming sounds and beams and lights and
shapes
and colors and all these things that they're talked about in the tantras in so many ways
peaceful wrathful deities and fabiana buddhas and all these things
what does it have to look like what is the definitive way that it will definitely look
like regardless of culture epic time gender class language all that stuff regardless of all that
and always in the room the teacher laughs
because it's at that level it's flexible
it keeps being flexible there's no ground you look in vadra safa what's in vadra safa's heart
another vadra safa with a different color what's in vadra safa's heart yamantaka what's
in yamantaka's heart it just keeps folding unfolding and if we try to get too tight around
trying to have a definitive thing over a certain relative expression then it usually means we're
kind of obsessing over a detail that's preventing us from connecting to practice actually
and at the same time there are very specific patterns of pure relative truth
you can't just mix and match them the tantras are also super clear on this if you once you
pick a game in arena a certain way a certain mandala a certain type of pure land the features
are the features lock in and they're interdependent and they change but it's definitely specific
features that's not just a mal amorphous just gelling of any pattern anything it's not chaos
it's very specific pristine patterns if you zoom in on any one pattern it opens up into a whole
another universe but before you zoom in it's very patterned because it's pure relative truth
interacting so it's very precise and then it opens into more precision and it zooms out into
more precision and so we have to maintain that flexibility when we're trying to really definitively
hold a certain point we need to hold it but hold it lightly so that's the final thing
thank you all so much it's always a pleasure thank you thank you all